# Homework 6: Reflecton

- Due on Saturday, May 25 at 11:59pm
- Weight: 8% of total grade

<br>

**Write**: Reflect on your previous work and how you would adjust to include ethics and inequity components. Total length should be a few paragraphs, no more than one page.

In my previous role as a Medical Writer/Statistician in a publishing company, I worked closely with health care professionals and was involved with the design of data collection forms and dataset structures; handling of patient data; analysis and interpretation; and publishing and presentation study results. While there are health care guidelines governing patient records, and medical research guidelines for regulating medical studies, I think there could be room for adjustments in terms of privacy and equality in several areas.

The first area is the de-identification of data. While medical study data are generally de-identified, demographics and treatment details might arguably be sufficient to be related back to a specific individual, particularly if they are about a person of whom one had prior knowledge (e.g. someone one knows). These may include a combination of hospital location, age, sex, condition, presentation date, treatments received, etc. Moreover, sometimes some (or parts of) identifiable information might have been used for data linkage purposes, e.g. certain identification numbers within a system (a practice that is discouraged in most places but still exists), which could possibly be used to trace back identity.

Second, communication channel also matters. While datasets are password-protected (usually end-to-end encryption), the password could be passed along in the same email that contained the dataset (or the link to it) — it would have been a safer to transmit these separately. Nowadays, a lot of study discussions also take place over video calls (e.g. Zoom) and messaging systems (e.g. Whatsapp), which have terms of use that permit the disclosure of the transmitted contents to third-parties (e.g. for commercial and business development purposes). If any identifiable, patient-specific information was discussed, it could arguably be disclosed to third-parties who are not involved in the treatment or study process. Dedicated secure communication channels are necessary for such discussions.

Lastly, in terms of equity, my personal opinion would be that, in medical studies, we often use standard medical assessment forms and questionnaires that are based on established framework for assessing patient outcomes. This might have excluded patient concerns that are outside of these “boxes.” Although there is usually space for “other comments,” they rarely constitute a significant part of the study, and are not designed with much detail. (Traditionally, “qualitative” studies that may assess more non-standard outcomes are usually much smaller in scale and deemed less important than quantitative studies.) Besides, while studies try to balance patient composition medically in terms of background conditions, they rarely (and it is also practically difficult to) balance sociocultural background factors. 

In conclusion, there could be room for adjustments in terms of privacy through de-identification of data and dedicated communication channels, and with regards to equity through inclusion of nonstandard outcomes and balanced sociocultural patient composition. More frequent and socially inclusive consultations for guideline updates can help to facilitate these needed adjustments.